Embodied cognition, which has been the focus of a multitude of academic articles in recent years, focuses on the connection between musical events and bodily motion, on both sides of the stage – from the perspective of the musician as well as that of the listener. The focus of these studies mostly falls into one of two categories: the first is that of empirical analysis of brain activity in response to musical events, the second is that of critical discussions on the constraints and categorisation of the musical body itself. From a strictly empirical standpoint, one cannot understate the importance of the nexus between motion (and spatial reasoning in general) and musicality. From the work of Lakoff and Lakoff & Johnson on [[Intentionality and Image Schemas - Saslaw|image schemas]], which in music are essentially used as a way to relate auditory phenomena to a spatial conception of sensory as well as cognitive reality, it is evident that physicality is a central part of our way of reasoning around and experiencing music and sound itself. Embodied perception digs even deeper into the matter at hand, exploring the physical reactions of our brains and bodies to sound. Without going into too much detail on the empirical side of the matter, I think the idea that is most central to the understanding of embodied cognition is that of pulse as an imagined motion. Pulse, and rhythm in general, are perceived by our brains and bodies as _imagined movements_, in the sense that listening to and performing music involves the same neural processes as physical movement. The actual movement that the body produces in response to a steady beat or repeating rhythmic pattern are thus considerable sympathetic movements that go along with the “actual” _imagined_ movement that we perceive in the music itself. On this very rudimentary base knowledge, we can further build a more general concept of metaphysical affiliation of music and physicality: since we perceive, on an empirical level, this connection, it is only natural that we generalise it and think of music as a completely physical phenomenon. Thus, the body of the musician and the music they produce are insolubly tied to one another.

Let us now analyse what this tie between music and the performer’s body truly entails, starting from the point of view of the performer themselves. Following the line of thought of musical embodiment, the musician’s body becomes as important to their music as the notes they decide to play. In non-Western musical conceptions, dance is seen as inseparable from musicianship. For example, in sub-Saharan African cultures, body movement is the ultimate way to experience rhythm, or embodied metre. Someone like Thelonious Monk could be taken as an example of an heir of this tradition. Monk’s experience of rhythm, which famously visibly manifested itself on multiple occasions, was an extremely physical one, one that made him, on occasion, dance along to his group’s music (like in the famous live recording of _Rhythm-a-Ning_), or tap his foot together with the music’s accents (see for example the live recording of _Evidence_, where Monk keeps stomping his foot along with the head’s accents throughout his comping and solo). The physical approach to piano playing employed by Thelonius Monk is perhaps the greatest example of how musical embodiment reflects on us as listeners. Gibson (1979) would characterise this as listening on an _ecological_ level: when listening to a Monk record, one does not simply hear the sounds of the piano, one hears _Monk playing the piano_: we hear the physical act of the piano being played (which is particularly easy to do in the case of Monk, given his aforementioned extremely physical approach to pianism and music in general). Another great example of “ecological music” is that of Charlie Parker’s legendary recording of _Lover Man_ (1946). There are many stories circulating on the session, and the truth is probably often exaggerated, but the fact remains that (perhaps partly because of the very stories around it) we can’t help but hear the struggle in the notes of the recording, and it is hard to listen to it without envisioning the musician himself, unsteadily wobbling, his skin shining with sweat, his mind wandering away constantly. Around the time of the recording session, Bird was traversing a particularly hard time in his life, he was enduring the symptoms of drug abstinence and alcoholism, and would soon be interned in the Camarillo State Mental Hospital. Ross Russel, the director of Dial Records, allegedly wanted a psychiatrist present in the recording room, who had to intervene by giving Parker his medicine before the recording of the track in question. Somehow, even without knowing the story behind the recording, we can _hear_ and _see_ Bird and his struggle, and we project what should be strictly musical observations (like the disconnectedness of the lines, or the articulation choices being made) onto the musician’s body (which we make out to be unsure, trembling, tormented), as well as onto their psyche (painting ourselves a picture of great pain and struggle).

Given the importance that we have attributed to timbre as a central element of musical “personality”, and the embodied nature of it, it is imperative that we take another step forward, to interrogate ourselves on the “_social and cultural forces that construct the concept of the body”__._

In seeing bodies as socially constructed entities, like, for example, Butler (1993, 2004) does, one is able to recognise the necessity of the divorce between the _body_ itself and the qualities (or, rather, _Ideals_) attributed to it – in Butler’s case, the analysed category of oppression forced on the body is that of “sex”, while our focus is on “race”. Because, then, race is a social construction with oppressive aims, and it is forced over the bodies of the oppressed – meaning that Race as an othering construct is not something one is “born with”, but rather something that is pushed on one’s self through one’s body – the bodily aspect of music making, which reflects on timbre, which in turn is used as a means of “identifying” the musician (i.e., attributing to the musician certain _personal_ qualities), ties back into the White narrative. In other, more direct words: the Attributes forced on Black bodies determine the musicality of the Black individual (as music is an embodied process), and thus the musical product of the Black individual is not only socially, but also _ontologically_ ascribable to the Black class. The physicality of the Black musician is subject to the Attributes that have been pushed onto the Black class by Euorpeans, and thus its music reflects those Attributes. Stefano Bollani (2016) gives an interview about the general consensus on jazz in higher musical education in Italian Conservatories, stating that “_there was a rumour \[...] among professors and, thus, among students, \[...] that playing jazz would ruin your hands \[...] that it would ruin your technique \[...] that while playing Beethoven \[if you also played jazz music] \[...] your hand would start hurting, because… you studied jazz?_” (_ivi_: 02:40), as well as musical journalism which “_talked about musicians such as Thelonius Monk as people who couldn’t actually play, and just threw their hands onto the instrument, playing all the wrong notes_ _\[...] which is what made his music dissonant and interesting in the first place_” (_ivi_: 03:15). As we can see, the physical nature of music, as can be seen in Black musicians such as Monk, in its distance from the White aesthetic, becomes the perfect candidate for racialised storytelling, as well as an instrument for arguing White (musical) Supremacy, and makes the whole world of Black music dismissible, to the White class, as being the product of uneducated, unrefined and physical beast-musicians. All these factors contribute to the “sound of the Black musician” (both on an ideal and on a sensory level), and since “_you can’t separate the means \[...] from what he ultimately said_”, they are part of the elements that act on the conceived and perceived nature of the music itself.