Despite its severe under-theorisation (derived, most likely, from the very elusive nature of its subject), timbre and timbral qualities play an incredibly important role in the way that we perceive and rationalise music. What makes timbre hard to describe is its extremely multifaceted nature, which includes (but is not limited to) the concepts of overtone composition, sound envelope, pitch to non pitched sound ratio, air pressure and tessitura. Furthermore, to add to this already massive complexity, the concept of _sound_, which is arguably what one ultimately seeks to understand through the analysis of timbre, is an even more complex one, as even seemingly irrelevant elements, such as articulation, line construction and intonation contribute to its making. Precisely because of this extremely broad, almost inscrutable connotation, however, sound functions as the primary vehicle for the musician’s identity (Solis, 2015). 

On a pragmatic level, the most appropriate tool for timbral analysis consists of a sympathetic approach, aimed at deciphering the very [[Embodied Cognition|physical]] gestures that produce a certain result, so that we may both learn something about the practical act of producing a specific type of 'sound', as well as the physical - that is, most often, vibrational - phenomena that take place. Pianist, composer and scholar Vija Iyer offers us, in his work, great insight into the matter of embodied cognition, as well as what he calls the "*kinesthetic/spatiomotor approach*" to improvisation. These observation, which essentially inquiry into the relationship between [[Embodied Cognition]] and music making, are the perfect *hummus* for the development of a wider understanding of the concepts of timbre and sound (intended as an extension of the idea of timbre that encompasses the broader practices that have been previously made explicit) themselves. Before any type of reflection about the collective sound of an ensamble, of course, it is only fitting to take on the already seemingly insurmountable task of analysing the individualistic relationship between a single musician and the timbre of their instrument.

This relationship, not unlike the relationship between an individual and their innermost private dimension, is often a tortuous and contradictory one, and in many ways it serves as a mirror to the outlook of a musician on the idea of music making as a whole. In practicality, the timbre that musicians produce is influenced by a wide range of factors, depending on the instrument of their choosing, and it is mostly possible to boil it down to mechanical, muscular actions. The way in which a pianist may choose to strike the keys of the instrument, the peculiar type of dance that a drummer chooses to pursue, or the subtle way in which violin players may use micro-musculature in both the fingering and bowing hand to obtain a certain vibrational response from the strings. In the case of wind players, the range of factors is even wider and more inscrutable, as it involves hidden musculature affecting aspects such as diaphragm support, throat position, tounging and embouchure. The resulting interplay between all the mechanical habits (which are trained with the often subconscious objective of obtaining a specific type of sound out of the instrument) that a musician develops and consolidates over time is what makes timbre their own. Interestingly enough, although through the development of mastery of one's instrument one might be able to "*bend*", so to speak, their timbre in a particular direction, every musician still possesses a "*natural*" timbre - just the way that a great actor might be able to imitate different voices and accents, but still keep his own, neutral voice as part of his identity. To make matters more complicated, a particular timbre, over time, necessarily evolves into a particular *sound*. Meaning that it is no longer only the aspect of vibrational production (the act of making a sound *come out* of an instrument) that is part of a musician's identity, but a constellation of other musical techniques, such as articulation, phrasing, and, in the case of improvisational music, the melodic lines that one decides to construct. All of these aspects, in turn, interact with timbre, so that their is a mutual influence between the two aspect, that slowly meld into a single element of musical and personal identity. I would like to once again emphasise the process of '*melding*' that is at play here: as an example, it is unthinkable to imagine John Coltrane's or Eric Dolphy's timbre without also picturing their overall sound - the very particular and specific way in which they articulate phrases, as well as the geometric shapes that those phrases embody. In the same way, it is impossible to imagine Glenn Gould's timbre without imagining also the very particular way in which he physically articulates every note. 

In the case of music that is not wholly European in extraction, timbre often assumes an even more central role - as can be attested by the fact that we often see transcription of great jazz musicians relying on pseudo-notation that emphasises timbric elements more than strictly melodic or harmonic ones. This more 'soundly', 'textural' notation is often used, for example, when the importance of phonic events and musical textures surpasses that of exact pitches – from the milder instances of glissandos and bends being employed in transcribing fast passages from John Coltrane or Cannonball Adderley to the more extreme example of graphic notation in Westendorff (1995) in the transcription of specific passages of Cecil Taylor’s performances. Furthermore, we see many incredible Black avant-garde musicians, such as Pharoa Sanders, Archie Shepp, and even the late Jackie McLean, subordinating the ideas of pitch and rhythm to their timbric virtuosity, with the result of creating an extremely personal approach to music, and a highly recognisable sound, one that could be used as a synonym for their musical and personal identity. While sympathetic deduction is possibly the greatest tool at our disposal for an in-depth musical analysis, the only way to understand the profound consequences of the unique qualities of timbre is a reflection on the nature of timbre itself, as it relates to sound and musical as well as personal identity. In this regard, the most telling observation of all, then, resides in the fact that musical instrumentation is only of secondary nature to the construction of a musician's personal timbre. Proficient musicians, those who have been acquainted with the practice of playing their instrument for a number of years, are often readily identifiable through their timbre, regardless of the instrument they are playing. Charlie Parker, as an example, famously played many saxophones over the years, often pawning or losing his own instrument, and quickly finding an often cheap replacement for gigs or recording sessions. At one time, notably, he played on a Grafton resin alto saxophone, and yet his sound was, reportedly, unaltered by it. Another remarkable example of a similar happening is John Coltrane, appearing on alto on #todo record, and having a remarkably similar timbre to his unique tenor sound. What we can observe from these phenomena, then, is that even when working with a different instrument, or one built from a completely different material, timbre seems to come from within musicians themselves. It is, in many ways, part of their identity, as it is a unique and distinctive characteristic (or, at least, most people find it desirable for this to be the case) particular to the individual. It is like the sound of a person's voice, a characteristic we immediately associate with a certain individual and, in some case, affects the opinions that are formed about their character. This, of course, holds true for any instrument, regardless of the physical technique required to play it - pianists such as Glenn Gould, Red Garland or McCoy Tyner are immediately recognisable to the trained ear, just like drummers such as Elvin Jones, Jimmy Cobb and Tony Williams are.

The reason for this resides in what Roland Barthes #todo source would identify as the '*grain of the voice*', the extremely human and, more specifically, physical component that is embodied by the act of producing sound, either on an instrument or through the vocal chords. That is to say, that when listening to a sound, to the playing of a specific musician, we often and naturally picture the physical act of their playing (as we might picture the act of someone like Jackson Pollock or Fontana painting), and identify the techniques (or, at least, give our best educated guess to what they may be) and the gestures performed by the performer in order to produce a certain result. In doing so, in relying on the idea of embodied musicality, however, we also produce a mental picture, together with all the judgements that are naturally attached to it, of the performer. What happens, then, when this cognitive process, this construction of an imaginary body through the phenomenon of sound is intertwined with the social reality of the racial frame? The answer should be self evident. In the context of White Pantheorism (which, of course, extends to the executive praxis of musical instruments in general, regardless of their origin), the result can only be the enforcement of racialised Attributes onto musicians of non-European extraction. What the idea of White Pantheorism posits as a simply intellectual form of ostracism now becomes a very physical, embodied one - it is no longer only the intellectual product of the subaltern class that is at stake, but the body and physicality of the Black musician themselves. It is no longer only [[Phonic Blackness]] that we are talking about, but the construction of a very physical embodiment of the ideals attributed to the Black man - one that is actuated through Black music itself. 

#todo ENSAMBLES


