
The shift in colonial artistic production, have, inevitably, strong identitary implications, seen as identity informs the arts and vice versa. Silvia Albertazzi views the process of the affirmation of a postcolonial identity as being comprised of two dialectic elements: the first (in chronological order) is the moment of **realisation**, where the colonised sees the imperialistic nature of European culture, and the second is that of **opposition**, where – and this is reflected almost exactly in the nature of artistic production –  the element being accentuated is the need for independence, the need for class struggle and for the overthrowing of the bourgeoisie. 

Along with this twofold process of self-actualisation comes the construction of a national identity, or rather, in our case, of a Black identity. The nature of the [[Slave Trade]] itself already facilitated the process of the creation of an African national identity in the US, as the slaves being sold to the British colonies were a diverse group, collected all over the African inland – an aspect which, in Western imaginary, is often left behind. 

When we immagine a group of slaves being sold to a plantation owner, we should thus imagine a heterogeneous group of people, with different geographic and cultural roots, different religions, different languages, and so on, being pressed together (both physically and metaphorically) in a very small space. Progressively, simplified African languages, understood by all, started arising. Religious and musical traditions melted together and, during the period of the great Spiritual Awakening in the British Colonies, a great number of them were converted to a common religion – Christianity. As a consequence, the idea of a “Black people” was not too unrealistic, as personal geo-cultural roots gradually vanished, giving way to the broader “African” identity. During the phase of **opposition**, the search for these African roots, for this already imaginary (or, rather, generic and mystified) Black history, is a great part of the evolution of the mentality of the Black musician. Furthermore, we also see Black separatist movements perpetrate the idea of the Black nation, and of Black national unity – the seminal text tying Black musicians to this nationalist reality is Amiri Baraka’s (who, at the time, still went by his birth name, Leroi Jones) Blues People.

Musically speaking, this process can be plainly seen in the sub-genre of soul jazz, with early examples in the music of Horace Silver  (in pieces like The Preacher, Senor Blues or Sister Sadie), who wrote several compositions based on simple pentatonic melodies, highlighting blue notes in the melody, often with a  shuffle rhythm or stop time. Similarly, Cannonball and Nat Adderley wrote many very melodically simple compositions (like Work Song), drawing from elements of the Black experience, while Sonny Rollins would dedicate a calypso tune to his island of birth – St. Thomas.  Then we have the incredible body of work of bassist and composer Charles Mingus, consisting in imaginative musical pictures (like Wednesday Night Prayer Meeting, Better Git It In Your Soul and many others), displaying immense compositional and instrumental virtuosity, drawing from his childhood experiences of the baptist church environment. All of these examples perfectly express the efforts of Black musicians to reconstruct a Black (and, more importantly, African) history and, thus, identity through their music. 

Another face of this is that of Afrofuturism, a cultural and artistic movement born in the 1960s and 1970s, which built a fanta-scientific imaginary of the Black man, creating narrative and musical works focused on the fantastical cosmogonicos of the Black man (and of the Universe in general), often using ancient Egyptian imagery as an example of African technological civilisation. The musician and composer Sun Ra, for example, played a lead role in Afrofuturism, often using space-travel and cybernetic metaphors to describe the condition of the Black man in America. This intellectual movement also influenced thinkers such as Elijah Muhammed, who integrated them, in an islamic-apocalyptic manner, not too dissimilar from the Christian belief system of pre-tribulation rapture, into the belief system of the Nation of Islam. 

The rejection, even in literature, of the realistic ideal in postcolonial writings, is seen both as a way to read (and re-read) history, one which is substantially incomprehensible to the White reader, and as a way to further affirm difference and, through the use of imagination, autonomy. Salman Rushdie would attest that the magical and fantastical element is a weapon to be used for the destruction of reality, which only after being destroyed can be rebuilt anew. The analogies between postcolonial literary phenomena and Black music production (and musical philosophy) are numerous, but regardless of the model one wishes to adopt for the socio artistic analysis of the Black American musical production, all that matters is that through it we see the story of the Black class.

> \[the 1950-1960s saw the] Assertion of a black-identified consciousness on the part of many African American musicians and their supporters \[...] many jazz musicians stressed self-determination and the rejection of mainstream American mainstream culture (Ingrid Monson)


