It is more than appropriate to look at the phenomenon of Black music through the lens of post-colonialism. This model is not necessarily to be applied in a strict historical sense (the status of the Black man in the US was not, strictly speaking, that of the colonised, although culturally speaking many of the same processes apply here), but rather as a tool in understanding the process of emancipation of Black art forms from the captivity of Western canons and models, and the relationship between this emancipation and the emancipation of Black artists themselves.

## Genealogy
#colonialism #marxism 
The starting point of the colonialist dialectic is, of course, that of [[Building the Enemy]], which itself creates a [[Neo-Marxist Theory|marxist dualist reality]] in which there is a dominant and a subaltern class. In the case we are presently discussing, this takes the form of the European making an Other out of the inhabitants of the new continents, making them their less than human subjects. The term 'colonialism', however, entails an ulterior type of dominion - not only a physical, social and economic one, but a cultural and intellectual one, too. This reality is made possible by different processes, such as cultural erasure, language imposition and mystification. 

- Cultural erasure, as the name suggests, consists in replacing the colonised's culture with the coloniser's. Take, as an example, the phenomenon of mass conversion often attempted by colonisers - the Roman empire, the conquistadores, the British Empire..... Many times this process even occurs organically, as the colonised adapt their own religious beliefs to those of the coloniser's, finding themselves in a position of power imbalance, and somehow fusing their belief with, for example Christianity. This very dynamic was often at play in African salve communities, as religious hymns and rituals from Africa fused with Western Christian beliefs.

- Language imposition is one of the most powerful tools of Othering and domination in existence, as the work, for example, of George Orwell attests. Language shapes thought, the words we choose and the linguistic patterns we use shape an incredible amount of our belief system as well as our social structures (see writers such as [[Lacan]], [[Friedrich Nietzsche]], [[Jacques Derrida]], [[Michelle Foucault]]). This is why controlling the language and the press has always been central to maintaining power and exercising it, as well as imposing Western thought patterns and cultural beliefs on non-Western realities. Think, for example, of Christopher Colombus renaming all objects upon arriving in the New World.

- Finally, mystification is the aspect of greatest interest for the purposes of this work. The mystification of the colonised land and of its people is a running theme in art forms from the beginning of the Modern era. 

The construction of these imaginary, almost magic worlds that reside in a land exempt from the laws of time and space, identified, of course, with the colony, give birth to a very specific type of fascination with the Other's land and culture. This element of [[Colonialist Fascination|fascination]] is central to the relationship between the White and its Others. The almost Lovecraftian curiosity drives the White man himself into the abyss and, unable to safely consume Black culture as part of the White class, he becomes, even if only briefly, the object of his own Othering process. The Other’s world and its inhabitants are no longer cultural and personal realities, but rather stories and costumes to be worn, modelled after an incredibly European (White) imagery[^1] which, in the case of Black jazz musicians in the USA, persisted for generations, and still does, in some form, to this day. This abstract manner of viewing the colonised and their land betrays the will of the White to erase the culturally and humanely diverse elements of the Other. The replacement of Native languages with European ones is the prime example of this. This process, in our case, can be extended to musical “languages”. 

## Mutual Assimilation vs. 'Whiteification'

During colonialist events, it is very common for the coloniser and the colonised to contaminate each other's cultures. This holds true across all time, from antiquity to modernity, and it is, of course, a consequence of [[Colonialist Fascination]] as well as pure vicinity. During the slave trade we see great evidence of this process, especially in the field of organology: traditional Black instruments, such as the Gambian _bandore_, were assimilated into White tradition (today the _bandore_ is best known as the banjo, a symbol of white rural musicality). At the same time, however, Black musicians started playing European instruments, such as the violin and, later, the piano. Analogously, in cultural melting pots such as New Orleans, we see White and Black musics profoundly influencing one another to the point where it sometimes can be extremely hard, if not impossible, to precisely ascertain the geographic origin of elements of the two musics. The other process we are interested in describing is, in many ways, a distorted interpretation of the former, and it is the strenuous effort to homologate elements from the colonised culture to those of the coloniser's. 

It is no longer learning and influencing each other, but rather appropriating and shutting down the colonised. Like the imposition of a different language, this violent process takes culture and beliefs away from the colonised, forcing them into a euro-centric world view. In many American plantations, for example, slaves were not permitted to play drums (as they were also feared to be a means of communication). An exception to this rule was made on festive days, where plantation slaves could play any instrument they pleased, and the music they played was now a result of a melding of different African traditions.  

Along with this quantitatively limiting process, we also see a qualitative imperative being applied to Black music: the conversion of numerous slaves to Christianity during the Spiritual Awakening period (rooted in the White belief in Black moral and ontological inferiority and the wish to better non-European people through the beliefs of White religious tradition), along with their previous forced learning of the English language gave birth to spirituals, religious hymns with a Christian content[^2] and an African musical matrix. 

This, together with the utter disregard for Black culture, is what set the ground for the practice of musical appropriation on part of the White class – seeing Black artistic production as a fruit of their own culture and beliefs, understanding Black schemas through European metaphors and, ultimately, assimilating Black artistic production entirely. Thus we see the (apparent) complete arrest of Black artistic production, as it is integrated into the White frame surrounding it. This fact is also observable on a larger scale, as it happens analogously in every colony: like Fanon[^3] would say, “The colonial situation halts, almost entirely, national culture”: the White class makes the Other’s artistic and cultural product its own object, be it an object of study, critique, fascination, or symbolism. In doing so, he appropriates the product itself, which no longer belongs to its creators, and either it completely freezes it the static nature of anthropological study or it claims it directly as its own, effectively reinforcing its artistic and cultural supremacy over the subaltern class. This is the scenario from which [[The Phases of Colonial Artistic Production]] proceed.

[^1]: The same holds true for classical composers, using exotic settings for their operas and constructing a completely fictional musical reality from the ground up.
[^2]: In a context where Christianity was itself understood much differently from the Catholic or Protestant perspectives mostly present at the time.
[^3]: Franz Fanon, 1961: les damnes de la terre. Paris: Maspero.