
The reality represented by the epistemological Othering of the Black class and its musical production had a profound impact on both parties: not only did it influence the views of the White class on Black music, but it also had a strong impact on the concept of self of the Black musician themselves. This aspect, often understated in academic work, is, I believe, of extreme importance in the understanding of the depths of the effects of any type of Othering in society. 

Whenever a discriminatory phenomenon is carried out and perpetrated by any sort of dominating class, we inevitably witness the internalisation, at least on a subconscious level, of said discrimination. While this internalisation is sometimes sublimated in the rivendication of the Attributes forced upon the subaltern class (like is the case in the second phase of postcolonial production, that of rejection, where an artistic, aesthetic, and personal identity is formed by the total negation of the colonisers’), more often we see it resurfacing as either self-hatred (like is the case, for example, in gender and sexuality studies) or validation of the dominating class’s ideology. 

In contrast to this, at the height of [[Civil Rights Movements|civil rights activism]], Black musicians started holding each other morally and politically accountable for their actions. Many of them were members of different associations, such as the [[Civil Rights Movements|NAACP]], and they would actively boycott realities tied to [[Racial Segregation]] (which, although already illegal, still more than merrily carried on). Emancipation from the [[Racial Frame]] was, then, a core belief of many Black musicians, and still the reality of internalised belonging to this frame existed, as can somewhat be deduced from the existence of artists such as Nat King Cole.

In 1965, Cole was performing in the Birmingham Municipal Auditorium (a segregated venue), when he was assaulted on stage by a group of White men, upset about his appearance with a white band. The backlash in the press was of enormous proportions. During the Civil Rights movement, Black artists were expected to also be politically militant, and Cole simply wasn’t: he stated that he would continue to play Jim Crow venues, although segregation already was, de facto, unlawful. That a Black musician, even during the greatest struggle for Civil Rights (this was only a few months after the Montgomery bus boycott) would make such a statement might seem strange to us, and at least two explanations can be thought up. The first and most obvious is the economic one – accepting every gig, regardless of the segregation status of the venue, was sure to bring more revenue. The second one, most relevant to this work, is that of internalised racism. A very complex mechanism, which insinuates itself in the psyche of discriminated people and subconsciously bends them to the oppressive ideology they are subject to. Although Cole was (or, rather, became, after the event) a lifetime member of the NAACP, showing, at least on the conscious level, the will to enter the class struggle against the racialisation of the Other, he still made the decision to abide and encourage Jim Crow segregation. 

Although this is, to say the least, circumstantial evidence, looked at through a lens distorted by time and the cultural perspective shifts brought on by it, when looking at the trends present in different histories of oppression, we can posit that the reason Nat King Cole did what he did was that he himself, deep down, desired to be left outside of the political discourse; that he wished to step back, to abide the White legislation and keep playing his role of the Black man and carrying on the status quo. The consequences of this mechanism were, perhaps, disproportionate – his assault in the press and the following use of him as an example of what a Black musician should not do – but the fact that this was immediately brought to the mediatic spotlight certainly served the purpose of exposing this somewhat ignored, at the time, mechanism of internalised racism. The emancipation of the Black musician from the role of “entertainer of Whites” was made all the more forceful, as those who still abided by this model, like the very same Nat King Cole, were publicly crucified in the papers, and thus the shift towards an entirely new artistic paradigm happened in an extremely self-aware manner.

> However, the ideological shift in the jazz community was not simply a response to larger political issues, but also a reaction to everyday economic imbalances in the music industry, the inability of liberal, color-blind presumptions to address them, and the in-between status of jazz improvisation as neither popular nor classical music. (Ingrid Monson)

