Given what has so far been said on the Attributes of the Black class, it should immediately be clear to the reader why Black avant-garde music (massively identified with the term “free jazz”, much to Coleman’s discontent), and the critique surrounding it serve as perfect exemplifications of the much discussed colonial attitude that permeates the musical world and its discourse.

If, indeed, swing era and bebop music share some elements with [[White Pantheorism|White music theory]][^1], avant-garde music, by its very definition, seeks an alternative path - sometimes even violently so. This procedure is object of much debate, as attested by the numerous conflicting reviews that Coleman’s first records received[^2]. This could seem natural to the external observer, given the necessarily controversial nature of avant-garde art forms. However, through a more thorough investigation, a new pattern emerges - one deeply rooted in the previously dissected dialectics of [[Class Construction]] and [[Colonial Discourse and Post-Colonial Theory|neo-colonialism]].

## Critical reception of racialised avant-garde music

Obviously enough, the prime factors that influence the way in which a music is intellectualised by its contemporaries often lie in the ears of the beholder - or, in a broader sense, in the social and cultural context in which these ears are immersed. The same can be said, in exactly the same way, from the opposite point of view - that is, that of the musician. Musicians too, like any other author or artist, are substantially children of their time, writing and performing music heavily informed by both the cultural (and more strictly musical) environment they are surrounded by, as well as by the social structures that they find themselves _nolens volens_ framed in. Although this statement may strike the reader as obvious and redundant (and it is both of those things), affirming the necessarily social and political nature of music promptly reveals the possibility of music itself (as well as art in general) as an ideological battlefield. This belief holds particularly true in regards to cases akin to Black avant-garde jazz music, in which an already present social conflict (namely class struggle) is sublimed into an intellectual discourse on the objective worth of Black art and creativity.

In order to understand all the forces at play in this reality, it is necessary for us to start our investigation at the root of the issue - meaning, with a definition of musical critique itself. At its core, critique consists in an attempt at decoding and understanding a work of art and subsequently, in a large number of cases, deciding its worth - an action which, regardless of its level of directness, cannot be absent, as even the most sterile of technical analyses betrays a judgement, one way or the other. The act of understanding something (be it language or art), as Raymond Gibbs (1999) argues, often relies on the determination of intentionality: meaning that in order to successfully decipher a product (regardless of the utilised medium), we as humans must first determine the intention of its producer. In their extraordinary work, Janna Saslaw (2000(?)) adds an indispensable tile to this theoretical mosaic: namely that of image schemas - "*applying modes of understanding body movements to more abstract domains of thought*").

## The Politics of Avant Garde Black Music
> At the most general level, African Americans were more likely to see an inherent connection between music and politics than their white conterparts, who more frequently accepted the art-for-art's sake argument that music was ultimately individual and above and beyond politics. (Ingrid Monson)



[^1]:  This resemblance can mostly be boiled down to the use of Western functional and tonal harmony
[^2]: “ *Sounds like utter confusion and madness… disjointed and mixed up and crazy* ”, Rudy Braff; “_Where does the neurosis end and the psychosis begin? The answer must lie somewhere within this maelstrom_”, John Tynan; “_They start with a  nice lead-off figure, but then they go off into outer space_”, Roy Elridge; “_His is not musical freedom; disdain for principles and boundaries is synonymous not with freedom but with anarchy … \[Coleman\] has been made a  symbol of musical freedom when he is the antithesis of that freedom_”, DeMichael.