Just like its [[White Pantheorism|Theory]], the music of the White class, too, is sublimated into a Universal. This can be objectively stated by observing the process of creation of the musical Canon (the compendium of essential composers, composers whose music Matters), where the music of White composers is glorified and aggrandised in such a way that it is unthinkable for a White musician to think that Bach’s music, for example, does not trigger the same affects in all human beings.

The choice of Bach as an example is not a random one, but one informed by the history of his music, in particular after his death. It is common (although incorrect) knowledge that Bach was completely ignored during his life, his music rarely appreciated or even performed, only to be revived by Mendelssohn in 1829 through a performance of his St. Matthew’s Passion. In reality, Bach was greatly appreciated by his contemporary musicians (Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven, to name a few), and his music circulated both in musician circles as well as bourgeois intellectuals. The first biography on Bach was published in 1802, nearly thirty years earlier than his alleged revival. Although the actual history of Bach’s rediscovery is now academically widely acknowledged, there seems to be little effort in understanding the implications of the myth surrounding him. The notions according to which listening to Bach (or any other of the musicians that partake in the Classical Canon) becomes a  synonym for “possessing higher cognitive capabilities”, or that listening to classical music for the infant child is a way to develop neural pathways, are all part of the same racial frame that created and continuously perpetuates the Canon and [[White Pantheorism]] in the first place. 

Because the White (male) musician is thought to be the true heir of the Universal teachings of White Music Theory, the composers who most embodied these categories (that is to say, White musician and users of White Music Theory) become comparable to Gods, their music something of divine nature, Universal and with the power to educate and better the listener, as long as it is cultivated in (or aims to expand) the field of 'Classical Music Theory'. The theory of “_emancipation of dissonance_”, which serves as a prime example of this mechanic, is born out of a simple enough observation: throughout centuries, general growth in musical complexity has produced music with a greater number of dissonant properties, which have thus become normalised in musical practice. What the White musician/Genius, then, understands from this simple enough statement, is that “the _technical_ advancements brought on by Music Theory (in its most Universal meaning, that of White Music Theory) have bettered the musical understanding of the most musically uneducated masses, who are now able to appreciate more and more dissonant compositions. Thus, if Theory continues down its path – and it will, since we are in control of it, White Musicians will be able to make the listener’s ears even more apt at enjoying the most harmonically complex and dissonant of musics”.

Because of this self-aggrandisation of the White musician and their Universal Music Theory, the Canon is no longer just a tool for self-celebration, but, inevitably, one for exclusion: if Universal Theory is a product of the White (male) class, the music born of people outside of this class (i.e., the Black class) does not bear the same worth, and thus the lack of interest in understanding its inner workings appears justified. This directly leads to the reinforcement of the Canon itself, which is by its very nature a means of exclusion and racialisation. Furthermore, the White musician devises many more ingenious ways to devalue the music of the Other, by hinging on the racial attributes they themselves supplied to these Others - like, for example, “_the equation primitive=rhythm=drum (an historically false one, as the Bantu drum, which did not exist in the palaeolithic, has a fairly recent origin)”_ (Zenni 2016, 127). If rhythm is the most primitive trait of music, as well as the centre of African musicality, then it follows logically that Black music (which early on identified the music of African slaves, and later evolved to include a wide range of popular music) is, itself, primitive and unevolved, while White music, which “_raised itself above instinctive and tribal percussion in order to build the great, rational structures of counterpoint and harmony_” (_Ibid._), is a product of skilful artistry. Black music is thus left outside of the area of intelligibility delimited by the creation (acted out by the White class) of the Classical Canon, and because of its position as an Outsider, there is no way for it to be understood or included in the discourse around music theory as a whole.

