
## Intentionality

>According to Gibbs social psychologist confirm that attribution of another's person intention is necessary for forming an overall impression of that person and sustaining social interaction.

Link to how we perceive and construct the Other, especially when this Other comes from a subaltern class. Just as it is essential for social interactions, this process is a necessary (although dreadful) step in the understanding artistic products.

Especially in music, which is quite largely defined by its very non-permanent nature, creating judgements on a musician's intention and understanding musical language can (and often are) one an the same. The act of listening actively to music can be identified with the two elements of memory and expectation. When understanding a musical form (either a short song form or a symphony of titanic proportions), we make judgement calls at every turn, trying to identify different elements and encapsulating them into neat categories, in order to understand the interaction between different musical events that we have already listened to. When listening to a Sonata, for example, our first instinct as listeners is identifying the thematic material, and this very step cannot happen without us making assumptions about the intent of the composer - like, for example, about the role that he envisioned for a specific musical phrase. 
#todo look through Rossini's notes on sonata forms

At the same time, by forming judgements about the author's intention regarding the musical elements that we have already encountered, we also make predictions about what is yet to come - both in the short term and during the whole arch of the composition. To return to our sonata form, for example, after hearing the exposition (??) of the first theme, we might expect there to be a modulation to the fifth degree (or the relative major) before the second theme is introduced. Once again, in doing so, we are trying to pierce the author's psyche, with the aim of determining where the composition might take us, as well as what we should be carefully listening for. This intellectual tension in the act of active listening is extremely desirable, if not essential, from the composer's point of view, too. One of the most important feats, for a composer of any type of music, is being able to lead the audience, taking their hand and accompanying them through their journey through the music, either nicely and in a friendly manner or playfully, planning musical events that undermine the projections made by the audience thus far. When an event like this happens (like for example, when a sonata modulates to a far-off key, or when its themes are varied in the reprise #todo examples) the listener has no choice but to reconsider his whole understanding of the piece, as well as his understanding of the composer themselves, as the new information might aid in successfully predicting subsequent musical episodes.

## Image Schemas
> Image schemas are cross-modal cognitive structures that shape percepts and concepts. They are formed from patterns of sensory and motor activity. Lakoff and Johnson name these schemas from their simple, basic elements. A list of them includes "container", "source-path-goal", "part-whole", "center-periphery", "link", "cycle" \[...]. Some of these image schemas derive from the body itself (front-back); others derive from recurring body movements or interaction of the body with external entities (forced motion). Image-schematic concepts are reflected in many kinds of linguistic expressions.

> The conceptual system makes use of many parts of the sensorimotor system

*Lakoff and Johnson, 1999:39*

> The same neural mechanisms that control bodily movements can perform logical inferences about the structure of actions in general

*ibid:42*

The inner workings of the conceptual system are heavily informed by many other areas of reasoning and perception. Extensive research has been made (especially by post-modern thinkers such as [[Lacan]]) on the relationship between language and cognitive structures, and there has been a great deal of research into its pertinence to music in general and jazz in particular (for example in the magistral works of [[Saying Something]]). The closeness between the two areas, for most debatable reasons, is strongly engrained in the general understanding of music and improvisation today. The use of the term "*language*", for example, when referring to a particular musician's or composer's "*vocabulary*", the collective of every musical "*expression*" that they use, the "*words*" that form their "*sentences*", is a strong marker for this, as is the idea of music theory as "*musical grammar*", or again, the fact that a wonderful music piece (or solo) can only be such when it "*tells a story*". An additional fact that rationally pulls the practice of music and that of language together is, once again, the ephemeral nature of both. Just as the execution of a piece of music (especially when improvisative in nature) constitutes the music's own full lifespan, the time in which a sentence is said is the single instant in time when that sentence comes to life. There is, of course, an argument to be made about the written word, however, just like there is an insurmountable difference between reading the score of Beethoven Pathetique symphony and listening to it being performed live, there is a huge conceptual and perceptive difference between reading a sonnet by Shakespeare and hearing it being recited. Music, like literature, is, often counter-intuitively, a completely aural art form, and the written word, like the written score, participates of its nature only in the measure in which we ourselves use our internal ear to sound out individual letters and notes and combine them into musical sentences. Furthermore, the history of music, as well as literature, has a common [[Music and Literature as Aural Art Forms|aural and traditional]] origin, which in many ways still has a bearing on the way that we experience it today.

Another area of meaning that has an unprecedented impact on our cognitive models, even in everyday life, however, is that of spacial and motory reasoning. Humans tend to utilise a series of what [[Lakoff and Johnson]] call *image schemas*, in some ways archetypes describing different relationships between objects in space, as well as relationships between those objects and the body itself.

> For example, when we say "the butterfly is *in* the garden", we are imposing a container around a particular segment of the land, air, and other features of the world, and we perceive the butterfly to be *inside* that space.

When mapping a cognitive *field*, we are most inclined to doing so in the exact same manner. The same, of course, holds true for musical fields - from the theories of [[Embodied Cognition|Embodied Musical Condition]] to the very theoretical approach we still preserve towards music. From the circle of fifths to [[Tonnetz and Geographic mapping of musical space]], to the very way we conceptualise abstract ideals such as [[Tonality]] themselves. We understand music to be *in* a certain key, we understand harmony to be a *path* of sorts, and we consider harmonic resolution the act of *coming back home*. 

Having established the existence of such a strong link between these two concepts and language, it is only reasonable to acknowledge their colossal bearing on our wider cognitive processes. In her work, Saslaw exemplifies this process with the use of the "*container*" or "*in-out*" image schema in relationship with the critique of the music of Ornette Coleman - meaning that critics perceive the traditional elements of Western music theory as what is "*in*" and the artistic product of Coleman as what is "*out*", as it is impossible to map using the same tools as most Western music. Subsequently, an ulterior process is brought to light, which Saslaw describes as 

> "*\[the listeners] mapping their response to the music onto the state of the composer's psyche. When trumpeter Rudy Braff states that Coleman's music* "sounds like utter confusion and madness... weird and mixed up and crazy" *he seems to be indirectly speculating about Coleman's mental stability as well*.

The authenticity of this process, however, does not satisfy the aims of this work. While this is certainly true, and it does add an essential faucet to the understanding we have of the inner workings of [[Musical Critique]] itself, it does not take into account the omni present relationships between this cognitive model and the idea of race in 1950s America. If we consider this "*container*" model, this "*in-out*" reasoning as immersed in the [[White Racial Frame]], interactions between the two classes take on a new meaning, one heavy with racialisation. Looking back to the origins of [[Class Construction]], we can clearly understand just how deeply the "*in-group vs. out-group*" dialectic actually is. It is no longer only a matter of social structure and its repeated perpetration - it becomes part of the very way human thought functions. The attributes forced upon the Other's class are no longer only a matter of simple prejudice or will to power: they become an integral part of the collective psyche (or rather, of every individual's psyche). 

If we return to the matter at hand - that of musical critique - with this same model, it is easy to see what role race plays in it: both aspects (the strictly musical and the racial) interact, leaving musicians such as Coleman at the margins of [[Judith Butler|intelligibility]]. On the one hand, he is a Black man. On the other, he produces music that is Other from the [[White Pantheorism|White theoretical frame]], and since he cannot do it out of Genius (which, as we have previously established, is a strict prerogative of the White class), he must be doing it out of ignorance and craziness. 

Just like Saslaw used the critical reception of Ornette Coleman's work as an example, I would like to posit a similar process onto the reception of the compositions by a "*far out*" musician extracted from the White class - namely Arnold Schoenberg. #todo look for better sources in "*The Rest is Noise*". Although Schoenberg's music, too, enjoyed a very mixed early reception, and some critics were admittedly hostile to it[^1] . In his "pre-serialist" period (an ugly expression that entails a substantial transformation in his harmonic thought, which simply did not occur, but a useful and evocative one), his philosophy on harmony and melody, as it seems to emerge from his *Theory of Harmony*, is very much akin to that of jazz musicians in the Fifties and Sixties - the constant exploration, the search for harmonic connections between distant chords, modulations to far-off tonalities, non-tertian harmony etc. If we consider this aspect of his thought in relationship to his compositional work, we might come to the conclusion that many of his pieces are pan-tonal in nature. #todo investigate atonality as a term (maybe in Cambridge History of Music Theory - Iyer). In the same way, most works by Ornette Coleman are also classified as such #todo Musical analysis present in *Steven Rush - Free Jazz, Harmolodics and Ornette Coleman*. The constant research that both these musician persevered is admittedly admirable, and yet  the critical reception of the two varies wildly. Whereas Coleman's act of upsetting the musical status quo in jazz is often seen (even by many notable musicians and critics) as the product of naiveté at best and an unstable psyche at worst, Schoenberg's always suffered from the opposite reaction.  Both in the USSR and in the DDR, his work was regarded as "*cold and barren*", especially after his first serial compositions[^2] : the product of unartistic calculation, completely devoid of message or pathos - and it still is to this day, in works such as Alessandro Baricco's "*L'anima di Hegel e le mucche del Wisconsin*". 

Once again, it is possible to see the above delineated cognitive process at work in its most brutal form. Arnold Schoenberg's music was, just like Ornette Coleman's, "*out*" of the container model of traditional Western Theory, but because he was a member of the White class, different attributes were forced on him (although he seemed to take pride in most of them, as most members of the White class did), which lead to his music to being characterised as unacceptable by some precisely because of the attributes of his class - Intelligence, Rationality etc. The extreme consequence of this process, of course, is that his music became, for a time, a sort of new standard (especially in Europe, where serialism and pantonality have been since then heavily dissected and their exploration has mostly exhausted their novelty), as, after all, they were the product of Genius (although a misunderstood one at that), whereas Ornette Coleman's work (especially the one following *Skies of America*, characterised by Coleman's newfound orchestral aesthetic)is often not given a second thought.

This, of course, is not to say that any one's composer has particular merit over any other - after all, I think any sane person would agree on the fact that the music of Ornette Coleman (and those who shared his philosophy) and that of Arnold Schoenberg brought about incredible change in the way that music is perceived and conceptualised today (though not as much as some would have hoped), and there are those who give both the exact amount of respect that both musicians deserve. It is, however, extremely symptomatic that they have received such a vastly different reception, mostly because of social structures and cognitive patterns grounded in colonialism and stratified racial structure that it created.

#todo emancipation of dissonance (maybe in White Pantheorism?)


[^1]: Blomster, W. (1982). The Reception of Arnold Schoenberg in the German Democratic Republic for H. R. _Perspectives of New Music_, _21_(1/2), 114–137. https://doi.org/10.2307/832870
[^2]: #todo which compositions?