It is a colonial prerogative that the colonised's language as well as artistic production be redefined through the coloniser's linguistic and artistic models. Musically speaking, the very first efforts of #todo musicology consist precisely in transcribing folk music and forcing it to fit squarely into the then solidly delineated Western theoretical paradigm. If we consider the model for artistic production brought forth by the field of [[Colonial Studies]], we can easily understand the workings of this '_White pantheorism_'. This term is meant to indicate the twofold effort of the White class: on the one hand, that of belittling Black musical performance by choosing to analyse it solely through standards of the White musical canon, and on the other that of holding monopoly over the idea of 'music theory' itself, so that the term always implicitly means 'western music theory'. This may sound like an exorbitant accusation, when it is stated like this, but once analyses the situation from the bottom up, it becomes readily apparent that it is so.

Let us observe a series of simple facts. First of all, most musicians and music students are aware of the existence of 'classical music theory', and they understand it to be the set of rules that regulate the inner workings as well as tonal (and non-tonal) relationships present in pieces of music that are part of the tradition of art music as a whole. Secondly, most musicians, since the birth of jazz education, understand jazz music through the same theoretical system. Thirdly, most musically educated people apply the rules of 'classic music theory' in order to understand different kinds of music, regardless of their relationship to the tradition of European art music.

So far, things don't seem quite as bleak as I have initially depicted them to be. From these three facts, it simply seems that musicians are learning 'classical music theory' and using it to analyse and understand different kinds of music. At worst, this reality is short-sighted, in that it completely ignores the fact that different kinds of music might abide different theoretical systems, but this still doesn't imply any of the seemingly disproportionate accusations that were made earlier. Let us state a few more facts.

Most musician and musical aficionados are aware of the existence of a classical [[Canon]], a pantheon of musicians that are considered to be 'classics', artists without time, whose notes will always be perfect and untouchable. The idea of the canon originated during the Classical period, and it is the reason why, today, when one goes to a classical concert, it is probably to listen to music from the past, and not the present. When we take a closer look at the canon, however, we notice a certain common thread - most of the music present in it is composed by White men. "Well - one might say - of course it is! After all, if we are talking about European music, it is natural that most composers should be White men". Regardless of the systemic misogyny that a similar exclamation implies, it is not at all obvious - there have been a great number of female composers, and a great number of BIPOC composers over the centuries, and yet none of them seemed to make the cut. This is to say, of course, that the Canon is the product of a profoundly racialised and genderised society, and that it fully reflects its biases. 

The Canon, however, is not simply a list of great composers of the past - it is the instrument through which we decide which music matters and which doesn't. The rules of 'classical music theory' are largely derived and inferred from baroque and classical musical praxis, and, in particular, from the musical praxis connected to the Canon. Therefore it logically follows that 'classical music theory' is apt at describing a fairly narrow scope of music, with a certain tradition and a certain social and racial connotation. Of course, there is nothing wrong with the idea of a specialised theoretical framework aimed at understanding a certain period of musical production in a certain geographical region. That is part of the definition of musicology itself.

The problem arrives when this theoretical system, as well as the Canon, become the only means of judging and analysing music. When this happens, when they are made universal and exclusive, they annihilate every music that is the product of non-Western musical conceptions. In today's day and age especially, where societies are increasingly multicultural, and yet the Western music market remains the most influential one, this reality requires a thoughtful and careful evaluation. The idea of 'White pantheorism', then, is meant to represent exactly this complex relationship: the creation of a universal body of theoretical knowledge, derived from Euro-centric (and, more aptly, White-centric) standards and ideals, used to judge and belittle music created by any out-group (in the case of jazz music, the Black class).

This leads to a profound racialisation of the music itself, since the possibility of music to be reduced down to a model understandable through 'White theoretical tools' dictates, in numerous cases, the value attributed to the piece of music itself.  By turning a narrow subset of music theory (White music theory, or the White class’s understanding of music) into a Universal then, justified the erasure of any other possible understanding of musical phenomena as a matter of fact – there is only one universal Music Theory, which happens to coincide with the theoretical product of the White class. As is the case with colonial cultures, “_the whole world \[is\] seen as raw material to be adapted to the gnoseological categories of the white man_”. (Bohemer, E., 1995: _Colonial and postcolonial literature._ Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 81).

The direct consequence of this is, of course, that a classically trained musician will not understand, for example, the music of Barry Harris, (in particular, in terms of voice leading, chord-scale theory and rhythmic approach) because it somewhat differs from what he has been thought to be Music, nor will he care to, because it is far from what he has been thought to be "_Real_ Music" (or, in classist terms, White music). The rules that comprise White music theory, which are now being extended, especially through the education system, to Universals, are seen as the only possible consequence of the Universal of Sound (in its physical, vibrational meaning), and thus the way the West has developed its theoretical system of music becomes the only valid one, the only truly Universal one. This example is only applied to jazz, but there are many more fields in which such a dynamic plays out – the White Theory-derived understanding of music fundamentally clashes with the reality of facts (that music, even in the West, is informed by non-White sources, or at least sources not ascribable to the idea of White Music Theory), like is the case with Mali Djembe (Polak 2010) music or compositions based on folk music of most origins (masterfully exemplified in Manuel 2002).

## Consequences
This process entails an extremely important dialectic consequence, which is the inversion between subject and predicate. Music theory is no longer seen as a cultural and artistic product, but as a means of explaining, writing and judging musical compositions. And when this all-powerful critical tool is the intellectual property of a strongly racialised class of individuals - on which holds power and privilege over others, it is bound to permeate musical education and critique. This brings the White musician (or critic) to justify, analyse and, in some particularly infuriating cases, even correct musical phenomena that are clearly derived from different views on music theory (if not from entirely different theoretical frameworks) through the lens of 'Classical Music Theory', thus revendicating these artistic products as their own while imposing a European theoretical lens, and, ultimately, European meters of judgements and of worth. This, it should be pointed out, is in complete conformity with the practices of [[Colonial Studies|colonialism]], in which the colonisers seek to explain colonial reality through a European lens. 

Furthermore, we can consider the interaction between these two factors: the fact that Black music does not strictly adhere to the White aesthetic, and the proximity (both physical and sociocultural) of Black and White music in the United States. The latter created the previously discussed sense of fascination, almost visceral attraction (determined by the racial attributes ascribed to the Black class and, thus, its music), that sparked the listening interest of the White musician (excluding the White jazz musician, who on occasion, at least intellectually, stepped outside of the White frame), while the former rendered the music itself worthless from an intellectual and theoretical standpoint, since only the music completely adhering to Universal White Theory was the work of the Genius (in the most Schenkerian sense of the word). Thus, from the White point of view, the Black musician must be creating something of _some_ value (albeit not an intellectual or artistic one), but they must also be devoid of any understanding of the inner workings of the music itself, since their music does not conform to the White aesthetic (meaning that it is not the product of intellectual and artistic decisions, but of animalistic instinct[^2], something clearly inferior to the refined Theory of the White class).[^3]

## Examples
This same mindset can be seen in the works of Music Theorists such as Gunther Schuller (\[1958\] 1986), who maintained that the central quality of an improvised solo was its coherence, which could be quantified through the tools of Schenkerian analysis, or public figures such as Ben Shapiro (2019), claiming that “rap is not music” because, according to their “_music theorist father who went to music school_” (_ivi:_ 00:10), all music has three aspects – melody, harmony, and rhythm – and rap allegedly only possesses the latter, making it “_rhythmic speaking_”, and not a form of music, or that “_rock was an actual degradation of skill for music from jazz, which was actually a degradation of skill from classical \[music\]_” (_ivi:_ 03:38). Even renowned musicians, such as Luciano Berio (????) maintained that improvised music was nothing but the product of amateurish efforts, and that written music was the far intellectually and artistically superior means for musical production – as it aligned with the White Theoretical Musical Aesthetic. In all these cases, we see the use of 'Classical Music Theory[^1]' (or rather its warped image) as a Universal, being used to judge and appropriate products of cultures that are Othered, in the continuous perpetration of the [[Marxist Historical Materialism|class struggle]] between Racialised communities.

Aaron Copland (in Monson):
> Progressive jazz has been freed of harmonic limitations... Now its main trouble is a lack of unity in expressive content, by failing to drive home a unified idea. Progressive jazz composers don't always know, expressively, what they're trying to do. They seem to be distracted by amusing things along the way.

The status of "composer" is reserved to classical (White) composers.

> It is not surprising that in the late forties and early fifties such emphasis \[as that demonstrated by Gunther Schueller, for example] was placed on comparing leading jazz musicians to modern classical composers, for to do so was to claim a right to higher cultural status for jazz and a new uncompromising identity for the jazz musician.


[^1]: It should be pointed out that the use of this term is, in itself, absurd, and that its use, always in single quotes, is meant to only reflect this absurdity
[^2]:  See Henry Martin (????) and Walter Kingsley (1917)
[^3]:   appropriations and opinions on jazz in white avant-garde music, Lewis (1996)
^ #todo